  Occasions of hatred are certainly never settled by hatred. They are  settled by freedom from hatred. This is the eternal law. 5
  Others may not understand that we must practice self-control, but  quarrelling dies away in those who understand this fact. 6
  In the same way that rain breaks into a house with a bad roof, desire  breaks into the mind that has not been practising meditation. 13
  Here and beyond he suffers. The wrong-doer suffers both ways. He suffers  and is tormented to see his own depraved behaviour. 15
  Here and beyond he is glad. The doer of good is glad both ways. He is  glad and rejoices to see his own good deeds. 16
  So having clearly understood the value of attention, wise men take  pleasure in it, rejoicing in what the saints have practised. 22
  By resolution and attention, by discipline and self-control, a clever  man may build himself an island that no flood can overthrow. 25
  Foolish, ignorant people indulge in careless lives, whereas a clever man  guards his attention as his most precious possession. 26
  Don't indulge in careless behaviour. Don't be the friend of sensual  pleasures. He who meditates attentively attains abundant joy. 27
  Elusive and unreliable as it is, the wise man straightens out his  restless, agitated mind, like a fletcher crafting an arrow. 33
  Trying to break out of the Tempter's control, one's mind writhes to and  fro, like a fish pulled from its watery home onto dry ground. 34
  With his mind free from the inflow of thoughts and from restlessness, by  abandoning both good and evil, an alert man knows no fear. 39
  Before long this body will be lying on the ground, discarded and  unconscious, like a useless bit of wood. 41
  One's own misdirected thought can do one more harm than an enemy or an  ill-wisher. 42
  Even your mother, father or any other relative cannot do you as much  good as your own properly directed thought. 43
  Death carries off a man busy picking flowers with an besotted mind, like  a great flood does a sleeping village. 47
  A holy man should behave in the village like a bee which takes its food  from a flower without hurting its appearance or its scent. 49
  Like a fine flower, beautiful to look at and scented too, fine words  bear fruit in a man who acts well in accordance with them. 52
  Sandalwood, tagara, lotus, jasmine - the fragrance of virtue is  unrivalled by such kinds of perfume. 55
  Stupid fools go through life as their own enemies, doing evil deeds  which have bitter consequences. 66
  A deed is not well done if one suffers after doing it, if one bears the  consequences sobbing and with tears streaming down one's face. 67
  But a deed is well done if one does not suffer after doing it, if one  experiences the consequences smiling and contented. 68
  A fool thinks it like honey so long as the bad deed does not bear fruit,  but when it does bear fruit he experiences suffering. 69
  Like fresh milk a bad deed does not turn at once. It follows a fool  scorching him like a smouldering fire. 71
  A fool acquires knowledge only to his own disadvantage. It destroys what  good he has, and turns his brains. 72
  If a man disciplines, instructs and restrains them from what is not  right, he will be dear to the good, and disliked by the bad. 77
  He who drinks in the Truth will live happily with a peaceful mind. A  wise man always delights in the Truth taught by the saints. 79
  Navvies channel water, fletchers fashion arrows, and carpenters work on  wood, but the wise disciple themselves. 80
  Like a solid rock is not shaken by the wind, so the wise are not moved  by praise or blame. 81
  The wise find peace on hearing the truth, like a deep, clear,  undisturbed lake. 82
  Journey over, sorrowless, freed in every way, and with all bonds broken  - for such a man there is no more distress. 90
  Freed by full realisation and at peace, the mind of such a man is at  peace, and his speech and action peaceful. 96
  Whether in the village or the forest, whether on high ground or low,  wherever the enlightened live, that is a delightful spot. 98
  Delightful for them are the forests where men find no delight. The  desire-free find delight there, for they seek no sensual joys. 99
  Better than a thousand pointless words is one saying to the point on  hearing which one finds peace. 100
  Better than a thousand pointless verses is one stanza on hearing which  one finds peace. 101
  Better than reciting a hundred pointless verses is one verse of the  teaching (one dhammapada) on hearing which one finds peace. 102
  Though one were to live a hundred years lazy and effortless, the  life of a single day is better if one makes a real effort. 112
  Be urgent in good; hold your thoughts off evil. When one is slack in  doing good the mind delights in evil. 116
  If a man has done good, let him keep on doing it. Let him create an  inclination to it. The accumulation of good means happiness. 118
  All fear violence, all are afraid of death. Seeing the similarity to  oneself, one should not use violence or have it used. 129
  All fear violence, life is dear to all. Seeing the similarity to  oneself, one should not use violence or have it used. 130
  He who does violence to creatures seeking happiness like himself does  not find happiness after death. 131
  He who does no violence to creatures seeking happiness like himself does  find happiness after death. 132
  Like a cowherd driving cows off to the fields, so old age and death take  away the years from the living. 135
  Even when he is doing evil, the fool does not realise it. The idiot is  punished by his own deeds, like one is scorched by fire. 136
  Where is that man in the world who is so restrained by shame that he  avoids laziness like a thoroughbred horse avoids the whip? 143
  Navvies channel water, fletchers fashion arrows, and carpenters work on  wood, but the good disciple themselves. 145
  When these grey bones are cast aside like gourds in autumn, what  pleasure will there be in looking at them? 149
  It is a city built of bones, and daubed with flesh and blood, in which  old age and death, pride and hypocrisy are the inhabitants. 150
  An ignorant man ages like an ox. His flesh may increase, but not his  understanding. 152
  Those who have not lived the holy life, and have not acquired wealth in  their youth, lie like spent arrows, grieving for times past. 156
  First he should establish himself in what is right. Then if he teaches  others, the wise man will not be corrupted. 158
  One is one's own guardian. What other guardian could one have? With  oneself well disciplined one obtains a rare guardian indeed. 160
  The evil he has done himself and which had its origin and being in  himself breaks a fool, like a diamond breaks a precious stone. 161
  A man of great immorality is like a creeper, suffocating the tree it is  on. He does to himself just what an enemy would wish him. 162
  Wake up and don't be careless, but lead a life of well-doing. He who  follows righteousness lives happily in this world and the next. 168
  Lead a life of righteousness, and not a life of wrong-doing. He who  follows righteousness lives happily in this world and the next. 169
  Look on the world as a bubble, look on it as a mirage. The King of Death  never finds him who views the world like that. 170
  When a man's bad deeds are covered over by good ones, he illuminates the  world, like the moon breaking away from a cloud. 173
  Blinded indeed is this world. Few are those who see the truth. Like a  bird breaking out of the net, few are those who go to heaven. 174
  To abstain from all evil, the practice of good, and the thorough  purification of one's mind - this is the teaching of the Buddhas. 183
  A truly thoroughbred man (a Buddha) is hard to find. He is not born  anywhere, but where that seer is born, the people prosper. 193
  Happy indeed we live who are free from hatred among those who still  hate. In the midst of hate-filled men, we live free from hatred. 197
  Happy indeed we live who are free from disease among those still  diseased. In the midst of diseased men, we live free from disease. 198
  Happy indeed we live who are free from worry among those who are still  worried. In the midst of worried men, we live free from worry. 199
  Happy indeed we live who have nothing of our own. We shall feed on joy,  just like the radiant devas. 200
  It is good to meet with the saints. Living with them is always sweet. By  not meeting fools one can be happy all the time. 206
  Never have anything to do with likes and dislikes. The absence of what  one likes is painful, as is the presence of what one dislikes. 210
  From preference arises sorrow, from preference arises fear, but he who  is freed from preference has no sorrow and certainly no fear. 212
  From affection arises sorrow, from affection arises fear, but he who is  freed from affection has no sorrow and certainly no fear. 213
  From pleasure arises sorrow, from pleasure arises fear, but he who is  freed from pleasure has no sorrow and certainly no fear. 214
  From sensuality arises sorrow, from sensuality arises fear, but he who  is freed from sensuality has no sorrow and certainly no fear. 215
  From craving arises sorrow, from craving arises fear, but he who is  freed from craving has no sorrow and certainly no fear. 216
  Inflowing thoughts come to an end in those who are ever alert of mind,  training themselves night and day, and ever intent on nirvana. 226
  There never has been, there never will be, and there is not now any man  exclusively criticised or exclusively praised. 228
  Guard against physical unruliness. Be restrained in body. Abandoning  physical wrong doing, lead a life of physical well doing. 231
  Guard against mental unruliness. Be restrained in mind. Abandoning  mental wrong doing, lead a life of mental well doing. 232
  Guard against verbal unruliness. Be restrained in speech. Abandoning  verbal wrong doing, lead a life of verbal well doing. 233
  The wise who are restrained in body, speech and mind - such are the well  and truly restrained. 234
  Little by little, moment by moment, a wise man should cleanse himself of  blemishes, like a smith purifying silver. 239
  But the supreme blight, ignorance, is the blight of blights. Destroying  this blight, be free of blights, bhikkhus. 243
  So understand this, my man - Unrestrained men are evil. Don't let greed  and wrong doing subject you to lasting suffering. 248
  There is no fire like desire. There is no hold like anger. There is no  net like ignorance. There is no river like craving. 251
  One is not a learned man by virtue of much speaking. He who is patient,  without anger and fearless, he is to be called learned. 258
  One is not noble if one harms other living creatures. It is by non  violence to all forms of life that one is called noble. 270
  This indeed is the Way - there is no other - for the  purification of  one's vision. Follow this way. It leads to Mara's confusion. 274
  Following this Path you will put an end to suffering. I have taught you  the Way after realising the removal of the arrow myself. 275
  So long as the least desire of a man for women has not been eradicated,  he is fettered in mind, like a sucking calf to its mother. 284
  When he has seen the implications of this, a wise man, restrained by  morality, should quickly develop the path leading to nirvana. 289
  After killing mother, father and two priestly kings, and killed a tiger  as his fifth victim, the brahmin goes on his way unperturbed. 295
  A good awakening have ever Gotama's disciples, whose recollection is  always established, day and night on the Buddha. 296
  A good awakening have ever Gotama's disciples, whose recollection is  always established, day and night on the Teaching. 297
  A good awakening have ever Gotama's disciples, whose recollection is  always established, day and night on the Order. 298
  A good awakening have ever Gotama's disciples, whose recollection is  always established, day and night on the body. 299
  A good awakening have ever Gotama's disciples, whose minds are always  rejoicing in non violence. 300
  A good awakening have ever Gotama's disciples, whose minds are always  rejoicing in the practice of meditation. 301
  When a man has faith, is endowed with virtue, and possessed of fame and  wealth, wherever he lives he will be honoured. 303
  The good are conspicuous a long way off, like a Himalayan peak, while  the bad are just not noticed, like arrows shot into the dark. 304
  Many of those dressed in the yellow robe are evil and unrestrained, and  the evil end up in hell because of their evil deeds. 307
  It is better to swallow a red-hot, flaming iron ball than for an  unrestrained and immoral person to eat the alms food of the land. 308
  Lax behaviour, broken observances and dubious chastity - these are of no  great benefit. 312
  If it ought to be done, then do it; apply yourself to it strenuously. A  lax man of religion just spreads even more dust. 313
  Ashamed of what is not a matter for shame, and not ashamed of what is,  by holding to wrong views people go to a bad rebirth. 316
  Seeing danger where there is no danger, and not seeing danger where  there is, by holding to wrong views people go to a bad rebirth. 317
  Seeing a fault in what is not a fault, and not seeing a fault in what  is, by holding to wrong views people go to a bad rebirth. 318
  Recognising a fault as a fault, and what is not a fault as not one, by  holding to right views people go to a good rebirth. 319
  I will bear criticism like an elephant in battle bears an arrow from a  bow. Most people are bad behaviour. 320
  There is no reaching the unattainable with mounts like these, but with  himself well under control a disciplined man can get there. 323
  Take pleasure in being careful. Guard your mind well. Extricate yourself  from the mire, like a great tusker sunk in the mud. 327
  Weeds are the blight of fields. Desire is the blight of mankind.  Consequently offerings to those free from desire are of great fruit. 356
  Weeds are the blight of fields. Anger is the blight of mankind.  Consequently offerings to those free from anger are of great fruit. 357
  Restraint of the eyes is good. So is restraint of the ears. Restraint of  the nose is good, and so is restraint of the palate. 360
  In the same way that the jasmine drops its withered flowers, you too  should discard desire and aversion, bhikkhus. 377
  When a brahmin has crossed beyond duality, then all the fetters of such  a seer come to an end. 384
  When a man knows no this shore, other shore, or both - such a one, free  from anxiety, liberated, that is what I call a brahmin. 385
  He who does no wrong with body, speech or mind, but is restrained in all  three spheres - that is what I call a brahmin. 391
  He who, having cut off all fetters, does not get himself upset, but is  beyond bonds - that liberated man is what I call a brahmin. 397
  Without anger, devout, upright, free from craving, disciplined and in  his last body - that is what I call a brahmin. 400
  Not intimate with laity or monks, wandering about with no abode, and few  needs - that is what I call a brahmin. 404
  Abandoning violence to all living creatures moving or still, he who  neither kills or causes killing - that is what I call a brahmin. 405
  Unagitated amongst the agitated, at peace among the violent, without  clinging among those who cling - that is what I call a brahmin. 406
  He who utters only gentle, instructive and truthful speech, criticising  no-one - that is what I call a brahmin. 408
  He who has no desires in this world or the next, without longings,  freed! - that is what I call a brahmin. 410
  He who has abandoned human bonds, and transcended those of heaven,  liberated from all bonds - that is what I call a brahmin. 417
  He who has seen the passing away and rebirth of all beings, free of  clinging, blessed, awakened - that is what I call a brahmin. 419
  He whose path devas, spirits and men cannot know, whose inflowing  thoughts are ended, a saint - that is what I call a brahmin. 420
  He who has nothing of his own, before, after or in between,  possessionless and without attachment - that is what I call a brahmin.  421
